Blog post stateless (#791)
keycloak/keycloak-web: blog/2026/multi-cluster-v2-and-stateless-mode.adoc

Running Keycloak in such a multi-cluster setup today requires significant infrastructure beyond Keycloak itself. The v1 architecture depends on an external Infinispan cluster with cross-datacenter replication channels, dedicated monitoring to detect and handle Infinispan failover, and operational procedures for failback. This blueprint is tied to specific environments like Kubernetes and AWS, and using it in other environments would require significant work to adapt it.

Even in single-cluster deployments, Infinispan clustering introduces operational overhead: rebalancing data in distributed caches when a node is lost or restarted, and transient failures in login flows if a node unexpectedly disappears. In large installations, the login failure cache can grow significantly, consuming substantial memory and causing long rebalancing times when nodes join or leave the cluster. While distributed caches replicate data across at least two nodes — so individual node failures do not lose data — a full cluster restart during minor upgrades resets volatile state such as in-progress authentication sessions and brute-force counters.

> 

Reviewer: suggesting to add:
---
The `stateless` feature prioritizes consistency over availability. Every write is synchronously replicated, so no data is lost during failover at the cost of requiring a low-latency network between sites.

== When to use stateless mode

Stateless mode benefits both single-cluster and multi-cluster deployments.

=== Single cluster

* *Durable sessions*: Volatile data survives full cluster restarts during minor upgrades.
* *Simpler operations*: No more large in-memory caches, rebalancing delays, or transient failures when nodes are added or removed.
* *Trade-off:* Approximately 8-10 milliseconds of additional latency per authentication interaction, negligible for interactive login flows. Database CPU load and IOPS can increase by roughly a factor of two.

=== Multi-cluster

All single-cluster benefits apply, plus:

* *No external Infinispan cluster*: Eliminates a separate Infinispan deployment, its monitoring, and failover/failback procedures.
* *Session failover*: Because sessions are stored in the synchronously replicated database, users stay logged in when traffic fails over to a surviving site.
* *Environment-agnostic*: The architecture is not tied to Kubernetes or a specific cloud provider.

> * *Prerequisite:* A synchronously replicated database and a low-latency network between sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Automatic failover*: During a site failure, the load balancer redirects traffic to the surviving site with no data loss, assuming the setup was not degraded from previous failures.
* *Prerequisite:* A synchronously replicated database and a low-latency network between sites (less than 5 ms suggested, below 10 ms required for database round-trip).
```

* A highly available, synchronously replicated database (tested with Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL)
* An external load balancer distributing traffic across clusters (tested with AWS Global Accelerator)

All entities — users, realms, clients, user sessions, and now also authentication sessions and login failures — are stored in the database. Realm data is cached locally in each Keycloak node. Cross-cluster cache invalidation is handled through a database queuing table, not through direct network connections between clusters.

=== Database impact

Moving volatile data to the database roughly doubles database utilization compared to a setup where only persistent data is stored. Plan database capacity accordingly — both for connection pool sizing and storage I/O.

== Current limitations

* *Single-region only*: Synchronously replicated databases are generally not available across multiple regions.
* *Database latency matters*: Because synchronous replication defers responses until data reaches the other site, latency between database nodes directly affects Keycloak response times. Multiple database interactions per request amplify this effect.

> * *Planned outages*: The setup is designed for environments that can tolerate planned maintenance windows for minor and major upgrades of Keycloak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Planned outages*: Patch upgrades are zero-downtime. Minor and major upgrades require shutting down all sites except one, upgrading that site, then deploying the new version to the remaining sites.
```
